David Schaich (he): So, keen readers of the lecture notes will have noticed that on the twentieth of February we skipped over an example,
David Schaich (he): that
David Schaich (he): I think started this life as a tutorial activity. We haven't had tutorials for a few weeks either, but it might be interesting to go through with this
David Schaich (he): hopefully quick, supplemental Pencast.  To
David Schaich (he): both talk a bit about negative temperatures, which come up on that first homework assignment to next week, as well as --- probably more importantly --- providing a fun example of the utility of random walks as a modeling tool.
David Schaich (he): So this is a supplement to
David Schaich (he): the lecture on the twentieth of February, where we looked at the
David Schaich (he): definition of temperature in the micro-canonical ensemble.
David Schaich (he): To remind you that the inverse temperature was
David Schaich (he): defined by the response of the
David Schaich (he): entropy to a change in energy evaluated with a fixed number of particles.
David Schaich (he): This is in normally thermodynamic equilibrium. so that the entropy can be replaced just by the logarithm of the number of microstates.
David Schaich (he): and we will look at the example
David Schaich (he): of the spin system that was
David Schaich (he): introduced last week. We have the the energy it was given by the negative value of the external magnetic field.
David Schaich (he): multiply by twice the number of upward pointing spins that are aligned with that
David Schaich (he): minus the total number of spins
David Schaich (he): just to
David Schaich (he): cool
David Schaich (he): that general illustration. We have an extra one from the page.
David Schaich (he): and then the scans are pointing. either out or down compared to that
these
David Schaich (he): 6 spins have for aligned upwards with the field, contributing negative energy.
David Schaich (he): 2 that are anti align with the field that are contributing positive energy and pointing downward.
Now for each
David Schaich (he): difference that we have.
David Schaich (he): we know, in the micro canonical ensemble the energy is conserved.
David Schaich (he): So for each different value of the we have a different number
David Schaich (he): of upward or down reporting spins with the total fixed.
David Schaich (he): And then this different number of corresponding to the different energy will give us a different number of microstates. which then gives us a different entropy.
David Schaich (he): which then gives us a different temperature by our definition.
David Schaich (he): So, just to some quick illustrations
David Schaich (he): for the micro canonical system with the lowest possible energy. In this. In system
David Schaich (he): this occurs when
David Schaich (he): all of the spins are pointing upwards, aligned with that
David Schaich (he): external. If you don't
David Schaich (he): like. So
David Schaich (he): So in this case. and plus is just n
David Schaich (he): and minus 0, and the energy putting things in
David Schaich (he): he is
David Schaich (he): minus N. Times H. So that's the most negative value that the energy can have.
David Schaich (he): This is sometimes referred to as the ground states that is, terminology. We will come back to later on in the module.
David Schaich (he): The important thing here for the temperature is that the multiplicity of this critical state of the number of microstates with this energy we call that. And as a function of the
David Schaich (he): there is just one possible collection of spin orientations that can produce this number of microstates is just this one
David Schaich (he): that changes for the next lowest energy.
David Schaich (he): Yeah.
David Schaich (he): okay. policy. Yeah. Video: To think about this for a minute or 2. Hopefully, it's not surprising that
David Schaich (he): This is the system where all but one of the spins is pointing up the line with the field. The last one is pointing down.
David Schaich (he): and there are
David Schaich (he): 6 different options. For which of these 6 spins can be the one pointing down.
David Schaich (he): So those 2 microstates they both have that same energy with. and plus of N. Minus one single down, recording spin
David Schaich (he): corresponding energy of the
David Schaich (he): then
David Schaich (he): N. Minus one factors of minus H plus that single factor of H, which is minus N. Minus 2 H. So still negative, but less negative than
David Schaich (he): the ground state and the number of microstates. With this energy one is 6. For this
David Schaich (he): case we're in more generally. which we can recognize based on what we actually looked in the house. There's that I've been writing. We can recognize this as
David Schaich (he): coefficient, or end to choose one, and choosing a single spin out of the total end
David Schaich (he): to be allied against the field.
David Schaich (he): So generalizing.
David Schaich (he): based on those 2 simple examples we can
David Schaich (he): to find the number of microstates for the energy with some number of downward pointing spins.
David Schaich (he): Just to be and choose that number of
David Schaich (he): you should convince yourself that this is also I tend to call to, and choosing the number up and pointing stands. It is just factorial
David Schaich (he): over in plus and minus and plus factorial.
David Schaich (he): You can recognize n minus n plus as n minus, and then plus is and minus.
David Schaich (he): Now you get the temperature
David Schaich (he): problem.
David Schaich (he): This number of micro states.
David Schaich (he): We need both to take the derivative of this expression.
David Schaich (he): What we do say a lot with the of this expression to get the entropy, and then the derivative
David Schaich (he): of that.
David Schaich (he): So
David Schaich (he): that tells us 2 things. First of all.
David Schaich (he): we need this. and plus
David Schaich (he): in terms of you, can serve qualities that we take the derivative with respect to and end, we will fix. But more importantly.
David Schaich (he): we also need
David Schaich (he): a differentiable
David Schaich (he): approximation
David Schaich (he): to these factorial factors, which are not convenience to differentiate
David Schaich (he): in the homework assignments We're given what option he's applying formula
David Schaich (he): before that log of your large number is approximately
David Schaich (he): sorry. A large number of factorial
right, that more clearly
David Schaich (he): the logarithm of the factorial of a large number
David Schaich (he): is approximately any more and minus and with higher order corrections. There he is
David Schaich (he): another option. Go through in this podcast.
David Schaich (he): which is to model the
David Schaich (he): It's been a system
David Schaich (he): as a random walk.
David Schaich (he): You know the space of its energies
David Schaich (he): hold it
David Schaich (he): random, walk. energy, space.
David Schaich (he): So if we look at these sorts of illustrations and think about how
David Schaich (he): the energy is adding up from each of the spins that are
David Schaich (he): at play. In the total system we can interpret. It
David Schaich (he): is a step
David Schaich (he): of a fixed length, plus or minus one in a variable x.
David Schaich (he): which is minus C over H,
David Schaich (he): which something got it from our starting point in the spin system that we looked at earlier
David Schaich (he): is just
David Schaich (he): 2 and plus minus n.
David Schaich (he): So taking steps either to the left or right, or plus, or minus one in energy.
David Schaich (he): is the simple example that we considered when introducing random walks in the lecture.
David Schaich (he): So
David Schaich (he): it's. Modeling just reduces to
David Schaich (he): That's simple. On the random walk, for example, with a fixed step plan.
David Schaich (he): and in particular, because we are not imposing any preference on whether a spin points up or down. You're just counting them.
David Schaich (he): Then we
David Schaich (he): stepping up to one, or stepping with minus, one.
David Schaich (he): become the same. Those are just stop both 50%
David Schaich (he): E equals. Q. Equals a half.
David Schaich (he): So with this particular set of set of probabilities. oh. 2 to the power in possible walks
David Schaich (he): for each each walk
David Schaich (he): he's really a spin configuration
David Schaich (he): all of them are.
David Schaich (he): and the
David Schaich (he): the number of spins with
David Schaich (he): and minus downward pointing, so the number of configurations with and not it's down reporting spins. It's just going to be given by
David Schaich (he): the total number of walks times the probability i'll end up with.
David Schaich (he): and by this steps
David Schaich (he): a flag.
and my steps minus one.
David Schaich (he): and my the steps to the left and the random walk example. which
David Schaich (he): we know that that probability itself is just the
David Schaich (he): number of
David Schaich (he): ways
David Schaich (he): of
David Schaich (he): taking and minus out of the end spins
David Schaich (he): in that direction, divided by the total number of spins.
David Schaich (he): But now what we have. So this is a
David Schaich (he): essentially rehash of what we had on the previous
David Schaich (he): screen. We know that. and of the given energy is the binomial factor.
David Schaich (he): We've related that to the total number of spins and the probability for
David Schaich (he): the walks with the corresponding number of spins of the proper orientation. The power comes from the central limit theorem.
David Schaich (he): This will allow us to
David Schaich (he): get another expression. For this probability
David Schaich (he): I will actually
David Schaich (he): work with. and plus
David Schaich (he): rather than n minus, just for notational
David Schaich (he): convenience.
David Schaich (he): I'm. With the central limit theorem of gives us for a large number of spins is a probability distribution in this variable X,
David Schaich (he): the pre-factor, whatever with 2 pi and Sigma Square, and then the exponential of X minus U squared over 2. And Sigma squared for a single step with P. And Q. Equal
I have.
David Schaich (he): You can recall and look out that this was 2 P. Minus one for the simple case of 6 step lights.
David Schaich (he): Well, that's 0, as we should expect. If there's an equal probability of stepping way or left.
David Schaich (he): the expectation value is to end up about where we started.
David Schaich (he): and similarly, the variants
David Schaich (he): You' it to be 4 P. Queue, with both P. And Q. And equal to half. That's one.
David Schaich (he): So the probability distribution is just one over root, 2 pi n times the exponential of minus X squared
over to.
David Schaich (he): Now, this is the distribution. If we want
David Schaich (he): the actual probability for a given number of spins that we need to
David Schaich (he): integrate this
David Schaich (he): over a suitable range of X values.
David Schaich (he): In the first tutorial that we did have, we looked at the central limit theorem, and saw that
David Schaich (he): approximating this distribution as a constant within this range of integration is a good approximation, as the number of
David Schaich (he): steps or the number of spins becomes large.
David Schaich (he): So we will use that here.
David Schaich (he): and we will
David Schaich (he): determine that the range we want to integrate over. So
David Schaich (he): It's. P. Constant for a given value, and plus is the value of the
David Schaich (he): probability distribution from the
David Schaich (he): my X equal 2 and plus minus 10 times the width of the range
David Schaich (he): between this value and plus and the next, and plus it's just counting
David Schaich (he): the number of spins that are pointing up or down that changes by one as we integrated both of that.
David Schaich (he): And we can. So
David Schaich (he): probably from this Council approximation is just the distribution where we can also recognize that this argument. X. To handle
David Schaich (he): my capital N. Is just
David Schaich (he): minus E over H, so that the probability coming from a distribution
David Schaich (he): and ultimately for me central limit theorem and the training of the work. Modeling
David Schaich (he): is an exponential
David Schaich (he): minus. E squared over 2 N.
H. Squared.
David Schaich (he): and then
David Schaich (he): from the top of the screen we just need a factor of 2 to the N. To connect this probability to the total number of walks.
David Schaich (he): or equally the total number of
David Schaich (he): microstates that have a given value of the energy. This is an approximation that becomes exactly the into infinity limit. And more importantly, it is a
David Schaich (he): that is continuous and differentiable. Oh, sure! Oh. the energy! Yeah. the in the particle.
David Schaich (he): So taking the derivative
David Schaich (he): of the water rhythm
David Schaich (he): of them to give us the inverse temperature.
David Schaich (he): Well, the
David Schaich (he): property of the law, as always, is going to break up this product of factories into a some of
David Schaich (he): one of those terms is the what name of the exponential of
David Schaich (he): minus. E squared over 2 and H squared the log of the exponential is just it's argument.
David Schaich (he): and then everything else is actually independent of the energy. so
David Schaich (he): we can ignore it when it's taking this derivative, and we just end up with
David Schaich (he): minus E over
of 2,
David Schaich (he): the other one so minus E over and h squared. or
David Schaich (he): the temperature itself.
David Schaich (he): we have found that temperature is
David Schaich (he): approximately with a very good approximation
David Schaich (he): for a large number
David Schaich (he): out of degrees of freedom. It's about minus N. H. Squared over E.
David Schaich (he): So let's just make a few observations or comments about this. You wrap up this fantas before it goes you want
David Schaich (he): that
David Schaich (he): we checked
David Schaich (he): in the lecture on the twentieth of that
David Schaich (he): temperature, and the micro canonical, unsolvable behaves as we expect when we talk about heat exchange. It leads to a flow of energy from other systems to cover systems, bringing their temperatures into
David Schaich (he): better agreement.
David Schaich (he): But in this case there are some features of this expression from the temperature that are a bit different than our everyday expectations.
David Schaich (he): So, for one thing.
David Schaich (he): this temperature he comes in for this.
David Schaich (he): If the energy actually goes to 0. So one over e diverges.
David Schaich (he): and
David Schaich (he): the energy goes to 0 when there are roughly equal numbers for exactly equal numbers of upward and downward, pointing space.
maybe even more surprising.
David Schaich (he): depending on how far you've gotten with the homework is that the temperature becomes negative
David Schaich (he): whenever the energy is greater than 0. You solve
David Schaich (he): for the
David Schaich (he): lowest and next lowest energies. Those values were solidly below your phone. but it is possible to have a positive energy.
David Schaich (he): and that's it. A negative temperature.
David Schaich (he): Whenever there are more skins. can see a line with the external.
David Schaich (he): then there are along with it, so n minus is greater than n plus. So this gets us back to the physical meaning behind this definition of the temperature. that this
David Schaich (he): positive energy regime
David Schaich (he): is
David Schaich (he): a regime in which.
David Schaich (he): adding energy
David Schaich (he): to the spin system
David Schaich (he): with a fixed number of spins, actually reduces
David Schaich (he): the number of microstates
David Schaich (he): that the
David Schaich (he): system can adopt in the micro canonical ensemble where the energy is fixed.
David Schaich (he): That's getting back to this form of the definition of temperature. If
David Schaich (he): a positive increase in energy reduces the logarithm of, and then that sign feeds through
David Schaich (he): to the temperature itself.
David Schaich (he): We can also notice that the expression
David Schaich (he): you'll define whatever
David Schaich (he): the magnetic field is turned off, which leads to all microstates having vanishing energy, and gives us a 0 over 0
David Schaich (he): in that expression.
David Schaich (he): But you this
David Schaich (he): unusual behavior it's worth noting as well that
David Schaich (he): there is a regime where the temperature is positive and behaves
David Schaich (he): more like what we expect. We actually define
David Schaich (he): natural systems
David Schaich (he): that on the screen.
David Schaich (he): so a natural system in the context of temperature
David Schaich (he): as you get a positive temperature in the case of the spin system.
David Schaich (he): this requires a negative energy, just like the ground states and the next lowest energy state we started off with.
David Schaich (he): So it's a natural regime without the only possible.
David Schaich (he): and this corresponds to the state in which
David Schaich (he): larger amounts of energy increase the number of microstates that are available
David Schaich (he): in the spin system. Even in the natural regime
David Schaich (he): there is a
David Schaich (he): minimum temperature.
David Schaich (he): In this case
David Schaich (he): we have. We can see that
David Schaich (he): when the energy becomes the most negative value, it can be at E equals
David Schaich (he): minus N. H. From that ground states, and the in one factor of the H cancel.
David Schaich (he): and the minimum energy comes out to be yes. minus H.
David Schaich (he): That corresponds to
David Schaich (he): the lowest energy. We compute it.
David Schaich (he): and We can also see that
whatever we here
David Schaich (he): increase the energy in the system.
David Schaich (he): we
David Schaich (he): get to a less negative energy. Yeah. reduce the magnitude of the E. That's in the denominator. so
David Schaich (he): that ratio of the temperature also becomes smaller, so it also becomes larger.
David Schaich (he): Whatever a smaller number increases the temperature.
David Schaich (he): I get matching our expectations for physical systems. So this natural regime is generally what we will be interested in a part for that homework assignment where.
but also
David Schaich (he): considering the
David Schaich (he): temperature in a similar system, with a difference, analysis, and approximation, rather than using a ring, the wall and
David Schaich (he): checking to see what it really means to have a negative temperature rather than a natural one.